=============================
RapidSMS 0.11.0 release notes
=============================


Welcome to RapidSMS 0.11.0! These release notes cover the new features 0.11.0.


What's New
==========

 * Use ``load url from future`` in templates to support Django 1.3-1.5. Thanks `@miclovich <https://github.com/miclovich>`_!
 * Moved the RapidSMS project template instructions to the main install page. See :ref:`installing-rapidsms-project-template`. Thanks `@lemanal <https://github.com/lemanal>`_!
 * Cleaned up a lot of core to be PEP8. Added instructions for using the ``pep8`` tool on the RapidSMS codebase. See :ref:`pep-eight-adherence`. Thanks `@lemanal <https://github.com/lemanal>`_!
 * `TravisCI builds <https://travis-ci.org/rapidsms/rapidsms>`_ now run ``coverage`` and ``pep8``. Here's an `example <https://travis-ci.org/rapidsms/rapidsms/jobs/3896850>`_ from a recent build.
 * Simplified testing with introduction of ``RapidTest`` class. See :ref:`rapidtest`. This includes:
    * Add ``RapidTest`` and ``RapidTransactionTest`` base classes
    * Modify ``get_router()`` to return an instantiated object rather than a class
    * Update ``TestRouterMixin`` to patch ``RAPIDSMS_ROUTER`` directly with instantiated ``TestRouter``
    * Remove global variables/state from ``TestRouter``
    * Clean up documentation to focus more on ``RapidTest`` and ``RapidTransactionTest`` classes
    * Remove ``MockBackendRouter`` test class
    * Update ``TestScript`` to use ``RapidTest``
 * Moved official RapidSMS version to ``rapidsms.__version__``. Reference it directly from docs and setup.py.
 * Added coverage reports to core test suite. See :doc:`../internals/contributing/testing`.
 * Moved ``rapidsms`` module to root level of repository.
 * Added ``docs`` environment to tox setup.
 * Documented django-celery 3.0+ dependency.
 * Removed ``rapidsms.skeleton`` package and ``startproject`` command override See :ref:`installing-rapidsms-project-template` to use the new project template.
 * Removed ``runrouter`` management command.
 * Fixed a few typos in the Messaging API docs.
