=============================
RapidSMS 0.12.0 release notes
=============================


.. warning::

    RapidSMS v0.12.0 is currently under development and has not been released.

Welcome to RapidSMS 0.12.0! These release notes cover the new features in 0.12.0
as well as some `backwards incompatible changes in 0.12.0`_ you'll want to be
aware of when upgrading from RapidSMS 0.11.0.  Most RapidSMS sites and
applications will require some changes when upgrading to RapidSMS 0.12.0.

They key changes in 0.12.0 are:

* **Twitter Bootstrap**: The RapidSMS pages now use `Twitter Bootstrap`_ for a more up-to-date and easily extensible appearance.  See :doc:`/topics/frontend` for more information.
* **Contrib app updates:** Most of the contrib apps have been updated to use more up-to-date Django practices and to add documentation and tests.  A few obsolete apps have been :ref:`removed <removed apps>`.
* **Supporting Django 1.4+:** RapidSMS is no longer compatible with any version of Django prior to 1.4. See the `Django 1.4 release notes`_ for more information.
* **Removed RAPIDSMS_TABS:** Top level navigation is now managed with an :ref:`inclusion template <RAPIDSMS_TABS>`.
* **Officially adopted Celery**: Following the inclusion of :router:`CeleryRouter`, we've removed ``rapidsms.contrib.scheduler`` in favor of using Celery directly with RapidSMS. See :doc:`/topics/celery` for more information.


Updating to RapidSMS 0.12.0
===========================

You can follow these basic guidelines when upgrading from RapidSMS 0.11.0:

- Upgrade to at least `Django 1.4`_
- If upgrading to `Django 1.5`_:

 - Verify `urls.py`_ files have been updated
 - Verify `url template tags`_ in templates have been updated

- Set up ``rapidsms/_nav_bar.html`` to replace the `RAPIDSMS_TABS`_ setting
- Install ``django_tables2`` and ``django-selectable`` via pip or add to your requirements file. See `new dependencies`_ for more information.
- Add ``django_tables2`` and ``selectable`` to ``INSTALLED_APPS``.
- Remove references to `removed apps`_.

.. _backwards incompatible changes in 0.12.0:

Backwards-incompatible changes in RapidSMS 0.12.0
=================================================

In the goal of improving the RapidSMS core, we have made a number of backwards-
incompatible changes.

Change to Twitter Bootstrap
---------------------------

With the change to Twitter Bootstrap, the organization of pages has changed.
Simple apps might continue to work okay, but any app that relied on the
previous page structure to control styling or layout might need changes.

.. _Django 1.4:

Dropped Django 1.3 support
--------------------------

We decided to drop Django 1.3 support to take advantage of the functionality
offered in Django 1.4+, including `bulk_create`_ and `override_settings`_.
Additionally, with the release of Django 1.5, Django 1.3 is no longer
supported by the Django developers.

Please read the `Django 1.4 release notes`_ for upgrade instructions,
especially `Backwards incompatible changes in 1.4`_.

.. _Django 1.5:

Add Django 1.5 Support
----------------------

RapidSMS 0.12.0 should work correctly with Django 1.5, and we encourage
upgrading to Django 1.5 when possible.

Please read the `Django 1.5 release notes`_ for upgrade instructions,
especially `Backwards incompatible changes in 1.5`_.

We believe the most common changes affecting RapidSMS projects will be:

.. _urls.py:

Removal of `django.conf.urls.defaults`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Make the following change to all of your ``urls.py``:

.. code-block:: diff

    -from django.conf.urls.defaults import *
    +from django.conf.urls import patterns, url

.. _url template tags:

Change to the url template tag
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If any of your templates still use the old url template tag syntax, not
quoting a literal url name, e.g.::

    {% url url-name %}

for Django 1.5 they must be changed to quote the url name (or use
a variable whose value is a url name)::

    {% url 'url-name' %}

If you wish to maintain compatibility with Django 1.4, you can add
``{% load url from future %}`` near the top of your template, e.g.::

    {% load url from future %}

    {% url 'url-name' %}

which will turn on support for quoted url names in Django 1.4, and be harmless
in later Django releases.

.. _removed apps:

Removed stale contrib apps
--------------------------

The following contrib applications have been removed:

- ``rapidsms.contrib.ajax``: Old API used for communicating with the legacy router and no longer needed.
- ``rapidsms.contrib.export``: Horribly insecure database export feature.
- ``rapidsms.contrib.scheduler``: We officially adopted Celery for scheduling and asynchronous task processing. See :doc:`/topics/celery` for more information.

If your project references these packages, you'll need to update your code appropriately.

.. _new dependencies:

New dependencies
----------------

Some of the contrib apps now use `django-tables2`_ in place of the
RapidSMS paginator utility to provide paging in tables.
`django-tables2` requires less code to set up for common cases,
and also allows eventually removing paginator from RapidSMS, so
there's one less component to maintain.

The only app still using `djtables` is the locations app.

The messaging app uses `django-selectable`_ to provide autocompletion
in an input field. `django-selectable` is a well-maintained,
full-featured library for adding autocompletion in Django apps.

.. _RAPIDSMS_TABS:

RAPIDSMS_TABS setting removed
-----------------------------

The `RAPIDSMS_TABS` setting has been removed. This was used to configure
the list of links displayed at the top of each page when using the RapidSMS
templates. It was not very amenable to customization.

Starting in 0.12.0, the configurable links at the top of the page are
generated by including a template, `rapidsms/_nav_bar.html`, which the
RapidSMS project can override. Typically one would put list items there
containing links.  For example:

.. code-block:: html

    {% load url from future %}
    <li><a href="{% url 'message_log' %}">Message Log</a></li>
    <li><a href="{% url 'registration' %}">Registration</a></li>
    <li><a href="{% url 'messaging' %}">Messaging</a></li>
    <li><a href="{% url 'httptester' %}">Message Tester</a></li>

Region tags removed
-------------------

These were in the base template.

Moved Message direction constants to model
------------------------------------------

The constant ``rapidsms.contrib.messagelog.models.DIRECTION_CHOICES`` has been
moved to the ``rapidsms.contrib.messagelog.models.Message`` model. You may
also refer to ``Message.INCOMING`` and ``Message.OUTGOING`` directly.

Moved HttpTesterMessage direction constants to model
----------------------------------------------------

The constant ``rapidsms.contrib.httptester.models.DIRECTION_CHOICES`` has been
moved to the ``rapidsms.contrib.httptester.models.HttpTesterMessage`` model.
You may also refer to ``HttpTesterMessage.INCOMING`` and
``HttpTesterMessage.OUTGOING`` directly.

.. _Twitter Bootstrap: http://twitter.github.com/bootstrap/
.. _override_settings: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.4/topics/testing/#django.test.utils.override_settings
.. _bulk_create: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.4/ref/models/querysets/#bulk-create
.. _Django 1.4 release notes: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.4/releases/1.4/
.. _Backwards incompatible changes in 1.4: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.4/releases/1.4/#backwards-incompatible-changes-in-1-4
.. _Django 1.5 release notes: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.5/releases/1.5/
.. _Backwards incompatible changes in 1.5: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.5/releases/1.5/#backwards-incompatible-changes-in-1-5
.. _django.conf.urls.defaults: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.4/releases/1.4/#django-conf-urls-defaults
.. _django-tables2: http://django-tables2.readthedocs.org/en/latest/
.. _django-selectable: https://django-selectable.readthedocs.org/en/latest/

