=============================
RapidSMS 0.16.0 release notes
=============================

Welcome to RapidSMS 0.16.0! These release notes cover the new features in 0.16.0
as well as some :ref:`backwards-incompatible-changes-0.16.0` you'll want to be
aware of when upgrading from RapidSMS 0.15.0.


What's New
==========

 * Updated tox version to fix Travis CI builds
 * Tox runs tests against Django 1.4, 1.5, and 1.6
 * Allow 160 chars in messages in contrib.messages.
 * (Fixed `#422 <https://github.com/rapidsms/rapidsms/issues/422>`_) The vumi backend no longer raises errors on empty incoming messages. [Thanks `@vkurup <https://github.com/vkurup>`_!]
 * (Fixed `#412 <https://github.com/rapidsms/rapidsms/issues/412>`_) The :router:`DatabaseRouter` now commits all transactions before adding background tasks to the queue. [Thanks `@dodumosu <https://github.com/dodumosu>`_!]
 * (Fixed `#409 <https://github.com/rapidsms/rapidsms/issues/409>`_) The :router:`DatabaseRouter` will now properly group batched transmissions across multiple backends. [Thanks `@takinbo <https://github.com/takinbo>`_!]
 * (Fixed `#411 <https://github.com/rapidsms/rapidsms/issues/411>`_) base.html now uses the Django 1.4+ ``static`` template tag. [Thanks `@wilsonkichoi <https://github.com/wilsonkichoi>`_!]
 * Fixed a few typos in Part 1 of the Tutorial.
 * Updated ``django-celery`` in ``tests/requirements/dev.txt`` to latest version (3.0.23) so ``pytz`` installs correctly during testing and building the documentation.


 .. _backwards-incompatible-changes-0.16.0:

Backwards-incompatible changes in RapidSMS 0.16.0
=================================================

* Style files removed from base: icons.css, modules.css, splits.css, and
  tables.css. These are no longer used in the new bootstrap-based pages, so
  they've been removed from the RapidSMS base style files and are no longer
  loaded from the base template.

  The old ``locations`` contrib app does still use them, so they've been moved
  into that app and that app's base template changed to load them from there.

  If you have an app that's still using any of these styles, and aren't ready
  to convert your app to the new, bootstrap-based look, it's probably simplest
  for you to copy them from ``locations`` into your app and load them from
  your app's base template.
